# Chapter 2: Understanding React

React is a flexible and powerful open-source framework for developing client-side applications; it takes cues from the world of server-side development and applies them to HTML elements, and it creates a foundation that makes building rich web applications easier.

## Should I Use React?

There are two basic kinds of web applications:

* Round-trip
* Single-page

### Understanding Round-Trip Applications

For a long time, web apps were developed following a **round-trip** model. The browser requests an initial HTML document from the server. User interactions -- such as clicking a link or submitting a form -- leads the browser to request and receive a completely new HTML document. In this kind of application, the browser is essentially a rendering engine for HTML content, and all of the application logic and data resides on the server. The browser makes a series of stateless HTTP requests that the server handles by generating HTML documents dynamically.

There are some serious drawbacks to round-trip applications:

* They make the user wait while the next HTML document is requested and loaded.
* They require a larger server-side infrastructure to process all the requests and manage all the application state.
* They can require more bandwidth because each HTML document has to be self-contained, which can lead to the same content being included in each response from the server.

React is not well-suited to round-trip applications because the browser has to perform the initial setup process for each new HTML document that is received from the server.

### Understanding Single-Page Applications

**Single-page applications** (SPAs) take a different approach. An initial HTML document is sent to the browser, but user interactions lead to HTTP requests for small fragments of HTML or data inserted into the existing set of elements being displayed to the user. The initial HTML document is never reloaded or replaced, and the user can continue to interact with the existing HTML while the HTTP requests are being performed asynchronously, even if that means seeing a "data loading" message.

React is well-suited to single-page applications because the work that the browser has to perform to initialize the application has to be performed only once, after which the application runs in the browser, responding to user interaction and requesting the data or content that is required in the background.

### Understanding Application Complexity

React comes into its own in large applications, where there are complex workflows to implement, different types of users to deal with, and substantial volumes of data to be processed. The features provided by React make it easier to build large and complex applications and to do so without getting bogged down in reams of unreadable code, which is often the fate of complex projects that don't adopt a framework.