# Chapter 2: Fundamentals of JavaScript Functions

## ECMAScript: A Bit of History

ECMAScript is a specification of JavaScript, which is maintained by ECMA International in ECMA-262 and ISO/IEC 16262. Here are the versions of ECMAScript:

1. ECMAScript 1 was the very first version of the JavaScript language, released in 1997.
2. ECMAScript 2 is the second version of the JavaScript language, which contains very minor changes with respect to the previous version. This version was released in 1998.
3. ECMAScript 3 introduced several features and was released in 1999.
4. ECMAScript 5 is supported by almost all browsers today. This is the version that introduced **strict mode** into the language. It was released in 2009. ECMAScript 5.1 was released with minor corrections in June 2011.
5. ECMAScript 6 introduced many changes, including classes, symbols, arrow functions, generators, and so on.
6. ECMAScript 7 and 8 have new concepts like async/await, SharedArrayBuffer, trailing commas, Object entries, and so on.

## Creating and Executing Functions

### First Function

```js
/** A Simple Function */
() => "Simple Function"
```

Functions created this way are called **arrow functions**.

```js
/** A Simple Function with a Name */
var simpleFn = () => "Simple Function"
```

### Strict Mode

**Strict mode** is a restricted variant of JavaScript. There are many advantages of using strict mode style in the world of JavaScript. One simple advantage occurs if you are defining a variable in global state (i.e. without specifying `var` command).

```js
"use strict";

globalVar = "evil"
```

In strict mode, this will be an error! However, if the same code were run in nonstrict mode, then it wouldn't have complained about the error.

### Return Statement is Optional

If you have a function with only a single statement, then it implicitly means that it returns the value.

### Multiple Statement Functions

```js
/** Multi-statement Function */
var simpleFn = () => {
  let value = "Simple Function";
  return value;
}
```

Notice that we have used the `let` keyword to define our `value` variable. The `let` keyword allows you to declare variables that are limited to a particular scope of block, unlike the `var` keyword, which defines the variable globally to a function, regardless of the block in which it is defined.

### Function Arguments

```js
/** Function with Argument */
let identity = (value) => value;
```